## Research proposal summary

It is understood that part of the existing problems in social housing can be resolved through spatial reconfiguration, using customized furniture for each dwelling. One possible solution for this scenario is the adoption of digital fabrication associated with metadesign. Metadesign, as the "design of the design process," enables greater adaptability, appropriation, and production capacity of the project. Digital fabrication allows for (1) decentralized production, (2) greater customization of components, and lower equipment costs (open-source technologies). Therefore, the central hypothesis of the research investigates whether these approaches, by promoting decentralized and collaborative production, can financially solve some of the recurring problems in social housing. The research falls within the context of Design Science Research and aims to conceive and validate the metadesign (system) to improve interventions in social housing (existing situation). To this end, it seeks to understand the main problems related to spatial configuration in social housing and examples of existing and shared furniture on open platforms. From this study, the proposal is to construct a metadesign model to be applied in a participatory workshop with residents of three social housing units. The results of the workshop will serve as the basis for prototyping customized furniture pieces. The installation in the selected dwellings will then be evaluated and compared with the use of conventional furniture. The expected impacts include contributing to the democratization of design and architecture, improving the quality of living spaces in social housing, promoting community appropriation of the developed solutions, and reducing costs for adapting living spaces. The project promises to offer an alternative to the current furniture production model, standing out for its adoption of distributed and more accessible digital fabrication.

## Addressed Problems and Investigated hypotheses
In Social Housing Projects (SHP), it is common for residents to carry out renovations and expansions themselves to meet a variety of needs - including attempts to solve construction problems. This practice can pose risks to residents, exacerbate problems, and be relatively costly. It is understood that in some cases, spatial reconfiguration might meet some of the residents' needs. One possibility for this spatial reconfiguration is the use of customized furniture that individually addresses recurring problems in these developments. However, customization presupposes a different approach in the production model and a design process adapted to its own appropriation by the end user. In this sense, metadesign, as the "design of the design process," enables greater adaptability, appropriation, and production of the design. At the same time, digital fabrication allows for (1) decentralized production, (2) greater customization of components, and lower machinery costs (through open-source technologies). Thus, the hypothesis to be investigated is that metadesign, as a design strategy, and digital fabrication, as a production model, enable the solution to some of the recurring problems in SHP through a decentralized, financially viable, and collaborative approach

## General and specific objective(s)

General objective: To develop and evaluate a metadesign model as a customized and alternative solution for spatial reorganization in social housing. Specific objectives: 1 - To identify, in the literature, recurring problems in SHP related to spatial organization and layout. 2 - To identify and classify open source furniture projects for housing produced through digital fabrication (limited to the use of CNC Router, 3D Printer, and Laser Cutter). 3 - Classify the projects - in terms of material, function, and joints/connections - found in the sharing repositories. 4 - To conceive and develop a set of
furniture proposals at the metadesign level to solve recurring problems in SHP identified in (1). 5 - To apply, in a participatory workshop, the metadesign for the definition of furniture for a case study in the city of Uberlândia - MG. 6 - To prototype, in full scale, a set of functional pieces. 7 - To evaluate and compare the prototype with conventional solutions. 8 - To assess the design process from the perspective of metadesign. 9 - To structure an open-source library of projects at the metadesign level for dissemination and community appropriation.
